                            kladmin v0.2.1
                 'magic trio' user administration tool


Quick start

Just copy the "kladmin" script to a directory that is mentioned in your 
environment's $PATH variable and kladmin.conf to your /etc/ directory. Edit 
kladmin.conf and modify the LDPADMIN, LDAPUPTH, LDAPGPTH and AFSSRV options 
according to your system. For full functionality, kladmin must be run as root 
on a machine that is the Kerberos administration (master KDC) server, an OpenAFS 
database server and has administrative access to the OpenLDAP database. However, 
kladmin can also be configured to work without OpenAFS and/or OpenLDAP.


Introduction 

kladmin is a user account administration tool for distributed file systems based 
on MIT Kerberos V, OpenLDAP and OpenAFS, otherwise known as the magic trio. This 
system has many advantages, such as huge scalability, but user administration 
does not immediately come to mind, since every new account requires that one be 
created with the same name and/or ID number in each of the three subsystems. 
Luckily, all of this runs on Linux, an environment in which it is easy to 
develop tools to address these kinds of problems. 

Written in Perl, kladmin is a front-end for a number of standard utilities. It 
is not a replacement for them, but it does allows system administrators to save 
time with typical user account administration. It can be used to create and 
delete accounts individually, request information about them, as well as accept 
an input file to quickly create many new accounts from a list of names. In all 
of these cases the program can be instructed to create or delete accounts from 
all three subsystems, which is does by default. Or, it can be instructed to 
create or delete accounts from just one or two of the subsystems. Another 
useful feature is its ability to generate various lists of account names and ID 
numbers so that each one can be checked across all three subsystems. 

The design is such that, when creating a normal account, the same number is used 
for the UID and GID in LDAP as for the ID in AFS. Similarly, if an account name 
and UID/GID number already exists in LDAP, but not in AFS, and kladmin is used 
to create an account with the same name in AFS, the same number will be used for 
AFS account's ID. This also happens when an AFS account already exists and a 
matching LDAP account is created. 

To prevent many predictable error conditions, kladmin checks if it has the 
required access to the different subsystems before running any operations. It 
does this automatically for Kerberos, AFS and the GNU/Linux OS, but needs a 
configuration option to be set before LDAP administrative access can be 
ascertained. The required configuration file contains information such as key 
LDAP entries, AFS servers and partition names. 

This application operates according to a popular convention regarding the AFS 
directory structure used for the mount points of user volumes. For instance, for 
a user account, gwashington, in an AFS cell called, example.com, it is assumed 
that the directory path will be: 

/afs/example.com/user/g/gw/gwashington/

Using the configuration file, kladmin can also be set to operate without support 
for OpenAFS and/or OpenLDAP. Kerberos is always required, as is Kerberos 
authentication for OpenLDAP when the latter is used.

kladmin was developed on a Debian lenny system. It should work on many others, 
although in some cases the script itself will have to be modified to reflect the 
different locations of a few configuration files (included in the "Declarations" 
section at the beginning of the script).


1. Synopsys 

kladmin [-A | -D] -u <user_name>

kladmin [-A | -D] [-k] [-l] [-a] -u <user_name> [-p <password>]
        [-i <id_number>] [-G <given_name>] [-S <surname>] -m <email_address>

kladmin [-k] [-l] [-a] -f <file_name>

kladmin -I [-k] [-l] [-a] -u <user_name>

kladmin -L <code>

kladmin -v


2. Options 

-A	Add a user account. Requires the -u option. May be combined with the -k, 
	-l and/or -a options, although the default is to use all three.

-a	Specifies an AFS account.

-D	Delete a user account. Requires the -u option. May be combined with the 
	-k, -l and/or -a options, although the default is to use all three.

-f file_name
	Specifies an input file for adding accounts based on a list of names. 
	The output file is called "<file_name>.out" and contains, among other 
	things, the passwords that are automatically generated for each new 
	account. May be combined with the -k, -l and/or -a options, although the 
	default is to use all three. Accounts may only be created in this manner; 
	not deleted.

-G given_name
	Specifies the given name of a user for an LDAP account. If omitted, the 
	default is to set the given name to "Given name."

-I
	Display information about an account. Requires the -u option. May be 
	combined with the -k, -l and/or -a options, although the default is to 
	use all three.

-i id_number
	Forces the use of a particular ID number for a new account, although 
	this ID number must not already be in use. The default is to use the 
	lowest free ID number above the minimum value. 

-k	Specifies a Kerberos account.

-L code
	Depending on the code given, generates different overview lists 
	consisting of 1-5 columns of account names and/or ID numbers. The 
	possible codes are: 

	kan or k
		Four columns: 1.) names of all Kerberos accounts, 
		2.) UID numbers of the matching LDAP posixAccount entries, 
		3.) GID numbers of the matching LDAP posixGroup entries, 
		4.) ID numbers of the matching AFS account entries.

	lan	Five columns: 1.) names of all LDAP posixAccount entries, 
		2.) UID numbers of the same LDAP posixAccount entries, 
		3.) GID numbers of the matching LDAP posixGroup entries, 
		4.) ID numbers of the matching AFS account entries, 
		5.) names of the matching Kerberos accounts.

	lgn	Five columns: 1.) names of all LDAP posixGroup entries, 
		2.) GID numbers of the same LDAP posixGroup entries, 
		3.) UID numbers of the matching LDAP posixAccount entries, 
		4.) ID numbers of the matching AFS account entries, 
		5.) names of the matching Kerberos accounts.

	aan or an
		Five columns: 1.) names of all AFS accounts, 
		2.) ID numbers of the same AFS accounts, 
		3.) UID numbers of the matching LDAP posixAccount entries, 
		4.) GID numbers of the matching LDAP posixGroup entries, 
		5.) names of the matching Kerberos accounts.

	lai	Five columns: 1.) UID numbers of all LDAP posixAccount entries, 
		2.) names of the same LDAP posixAccount entries, 
		3.) names of the matching LDAP posixGroup entries, 
		4.) names of the matching AFS account entries, 
		5.) names of the matching Kerberos accounts.

	lgi	Five columns: 1.) GID numbers of all LDAP posixGroup entries, 
		2.) names of the same LDAP posixGroup entries, 
		3.) names of the matching LDAP posixAccount entries, 
		4.) names of the matching AFS account entries, 
		5.) names of the matching Kerberos accounts.

	aai or ai
		Five columns: 1.) ID numbers of all AFS accounts, 
		2.) names of the same AFS accounts, 
		3.) names of the matching LDAP posixAccount entries, 
		4.) names of the matching LDAP posixGroup entries, 
		5.) names of the matching Kerberos accounts.

	i	One column: all UID/GID/ID numbers in use in both LDAP and AFS.

	n	One column: all account names in use across all three subsystems.

-l	Specifies an LDAP account.

-m email_address
	Specifies the emailaddress of a user for an LDAP account.

-p password
	Specifies a password to be used with a Kerberos account. If omitted, the 
	default behavior is to generate a random password.

-S surname
	Specifies the surname of a user for an LDAP account. If omitted, the 
	default is to set the surname to "Surname."

-u user_name
	Specifies the user (account) name. 


3. Input file format 

The supported input file format is relatively simple, consisting of three 
fields: an account name, a given name and a surname. Account names may not 
contain any spaces, dashes ('-') or forward slashes ('/'). Given names may 
contain dashes and spaces, but the latter are only accepted if the name is 
enclosed between double quote marks ('"'). Surnames may also contain dashes and 
spaces, but never require and double quote marks. Each of these three names must 
be separated from the others with one or more spaces. 


4. Examples 

Normally, new accounts are created as follows:

	~# kladmin -Au bbeamon -p longjump -i 10005 -G Bob -S Beamon

If pressed for time, the same account can also be created with less input, in 
which case a password will be generated automatically: 

	~# kladmin -Au bbeamon

But, it is also possible to create an account name only in certain subsystems, 
e.g. Kerberos and AFS: 

	~# kladmin -Akau bbeamon

An entire account may be deleted at once: 

	~# kladmin -Du bbeamon

Or, only one of its components may be deleted, e.g. the LDAP account: 

	~# kladmin -Dlu bbeamon

New accounts can also be created from a list in an input file: 

	~# kladmin -f input-file

Partial accounts may also be created from a list in an input file, such as only 
for Kerberos and AFS: 

	~# kladmin -kaf input-file

Example of a list of names in an input file, each with a valid format: 

	bobama Barack Obama
	dvvliet Don Van Vliet 
	ahroliveira "Antonio Henrique" de Oliveira Marques
	pjwitzig Pieter-Jan Witzig
	rbourne Robin Bourne-Taylor


5. Configuration file 

A configuration file, /etc/kladmin.conf, must be created. A number of variables 
must be configured, while others have default values. What follows is a complete 
list of variables for v0.2.1 of the configuration file, any which may be altered 
as needed:

OPENLDAP
	Option to enable or disable the use of OpenLDAP. When enabled, OpenLDAP 
	must be configured to use MIT Kerberos V for authentication. Valid 
	options are "enabled" and "disabled" with "enabled" being the default.

OPENAFS
	Option to enable or disable the use of OpenAFS. When enabled, OpenAFS 
	must be configured to use MIT Kerberos V for authentication. Valid 
	options are "enabled" and "disabled" with "enabled" being the default.

APGARGS	
	Arguments used for the apg tool. The default is "-a0 -m8 -Mncl". Option 
	-n1 is always used.

KRBOPT	Attributes to give Kerberos user accounts The default is "-clearpolicy 
	+requires_preauth".

IDMIN	Minimum UID/GID number to use for LDAP and AFS accounts. The default is 
	10000.

IDMAX	Maximum UID/GID number to use for LDAP and AFS accounts. The default is 
	65535, which is also the highest value possible.

LDPADMIN	
	DN, or partial DN, required for LDAP administrative access. *Required*
	(unless option OPENLDAP is set to "disabled").

LDAPUPTH
	LDAP organizational unit for user entries. *Required* (unless option 
	OPENLDAP is set to "disabled").

LDAPGPTH
	LDAP organizational unit for group entries. *Required* (unless option 
	OPENLDAP is set to "disabled").

OBJCL	Structural object class type for LDAP UID entry. The default is person, 
	but other possibilities include organizationalPerson and inetOrgPerson.

AFSPRT	AFS partition. The default is /vicepa.

AFSSRV	AFS server for read-write volumes. *Required* (unless option OPENAFS is 
	set to "disabled").

AFSSRVRO
	AFS servers for read-only volumes. Supports multiple 
	host-name/partition-name combinations. No default values.

AFSQUO	AFS user volume quota in KB. The default is 0 KB (unlimited).

AFSPRM 	AFS permissions for users in their own user volumes. The default is all.

CW	Column width of the uname/ID list overviews. The default is 15.


When the OPENLDAP and OPENAFS options are enabled as they are by default, the 
values marked as *Required* must be modified, or else kladmin will not work.


6. Dependencies 

For full kladmin functionality on Debian lenny, a number of Debian packages must 
also be installed on the same system:

	apg                    
	2.2.3.dfsg.1-2                
	Automated Password Generator - Standalone version

	coreutils              
	6.10-6                        
	The GNU core utilities

	krb5-admin-server      
	1.6.dfsg.4~beta1-5lenny2      
	MIT Kerberos master server (kadmind)

	krb5-kdc
	1.6.dfsg.4~beta1-5lenny2
	MIT Kerberos key server (KDC)

	krb5-user              
	1.6.dfsg.4~beta1-5lenny2      
	Basic programs to authenticate using MIT Kerberos

	ldap-utils             
	2.4.11-1+lenny1               
	OpenLDAP utilities

	openafs-client         
	1.4.7.dfsg1-6+lenny2          
	AFS distributed filesystem client support

	openafs-dbserver
	1.4.7.dfsg1-6+lenny2
	AFS distributed filesystem database server

The krb5-admin-server package is required, because kladmin creates Kerberos 
accounts using the kadmin.local program. Consequently, kladmin can only be run 
as root on the host running the Kerberos master KDC. The OpenAFS client and 
dbserver packages are also required, because kladmin must be able to access 
/etc/openafs/server/UserList to verify which users have OpenAFS administrative 
access.
